## Towards high performance distributed stream processing

### Tl;dr

* One-year postdoc position at Univ. Grenoble Alpes (LIG laboratory)
* Topic: high performance stream processing engines
* Goal: Study the design and the implementation of distributed stream
  processing engines to take advantage of emerging hardware
  technologies (high performance networks, non-volatile memory, etc.).

### Context

With the raise of *Big Data*, distributed stream processing engines
have become a major field of study. Several projects, such as Spark
Streaming, Storm, or Flink, have emerged with the goal of being able
to process large amount of data in real time. These systems have been
designed to run efficiently on execution platforms such as Cloud
computing platforms where resources can be highly volatile, and
commodity hardware is used. In this case, peak performance is not the
most important concern.

Some execution platforms, on the other hand, provide their users with
a very stable execution environment and high-end hardware
resources. This is the case for some private data centers or for high
performance computing systems. In this context, one expects a stream
processing engine to be able to take advantage of the available
resources to achieve very high throughput and/or low latency. But the
design of existing stream processing engines hardly allows to make
full use of these resources. For instance, experiments show that on
platforms equipped with a high performance interconnect (e.g.,
Infiniband, Omni-Path, etc.), bottlenecks in a system such a Spark
streaming prevents it from taking full advantage of the available
network bandwidth.

Achieving high performance stream processing is a major goal in
several application domains. The one we consider in our work is
*in-situ* data analysis for large scale High Performance Computing
simulations. The goal is to analyze the data *online*, i.e., as soon
as they are produced. Analyzing data without flushing them first to a
Parallel File System improves the global performance of the system
while allowing to analyze larger portions of the data that are
generated by the simulations. As such, it has the potential to
increase the scientific knowledge that can be gained from the
execution of numerical simulations.

### Mission

The postdoctoral researcher will integrate a research group including
faculty members and research engineers, and work in close
collaboration with PhD and master students on the topic of
high-performance stream processing. The goal of our team is to study
the ways to achieve high throughput for stream processing by taking
advantage of: i) high-end hardware technologies (high performance
networks, emerging non-volatile memory, etc.) that are or will be
available soon in data centers, and, ii) the low resource volatility
experienced in some private data centers and HPC platforms.

To achieve this goal, the postdoctoral researcher will have the
opportunity to conduct studies on the design of stream processing
engines and/or on their implementation.

This work will be run in the context of a national project involving
academic research groups as well as some major French IT companies.

### Location

The postdoctoral researcher will join the Informatics Laboratory of
Univ. Grenoble Alpes, one of the largest laboratory in Computer
Science in France. Univ. Grenoble Alpes is one of the 50 best
universities in the world for computer science according to
international rankings.


### Job information

- **Position**: Postdoc.
- **Duration**: 1 year (starting date: ASAP).
- **Location**: Grenoble, France.
- **Laboratory**: Informatics Laboratory of Univ. Grenoble Alpes.
   (<https://www.liglab.fr/>), Erods research team.

### Requirements

- PhD in Computer Science
- Solid background in distributed systems and operating
  systems. Experience in the fields of data processing and/or high
  performance computing would be highly appreciated.
- Willingness to publish in international conferences and journals
- Very good command in spoken and written English

### Contact

 - Thomas Ropars (<thomas.ropars@univ-grenoble-alpes.fr>)
